 Dr. David Friel: Educational Perspectives from a Student of Neuroscience Dr. Friel shares his insights on natural science, interdisciplinary education, and personal growth. Dr. David Friel, Ph.D., is an associate professor of neurosciences at the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine (CWRU SOM). In this interview, his career and how he assumed the role of associate professor is explored through a series of questions asking him about his research, scientific thoughts, and educational journey as a student of neuroscience after serving on CWRU SOM’s faculty for several decades. Dr. Friel in 2023 | Unknown Photographer After earning a B.S. in physics and a Ph.D. in biophysics, why did you want to become an associate professor in the department of neurosciences at CWRU SOM? I didn’t. I would probably say that once one gets a bachelor’s degree, or even when one graduates from high school, one doesn’t know exactly what one wants to do. You might be in that same situation. When one graduates from college with a bachelor’s degree, there might be some ideas about where you ultimately want to go. But there’s still a lack of precision with respect to where you want to go. So when I graduated from the Ph.D. program, I knew that I was interested in physiology and neuroscience, and what really intrigued me was communication between cells and communication within cells. I find it fascinating, and having had a background in physics, I saw that there were tools that could be used to understand cell signaling that have been underutilized. So, I decided to do that. Do you agree with the assertion that biology, chemistry, and physics deal with decreasing molecule sizes, respectively, or that there are too many overlapping concepts from those fields to attribute a specific molecule size to each of them? I think there’s some truth to that. I think some of the biggest molecules that anybody knows about are in biology, so some of the big proteins (nucleic acids) are huge. So is the assertion that in biological creatures there are bigger molecules than there are in non-living things? I would have to think about it. They refer to living organisms that are absolutely huge in botany. So, the best I could say to answer that question is that the biggest molecules that I’m aware of are in living things. In biological systems, there are larger molecules than there are in some non-biological, non-living systems. When I was researching the neuroscience major at CWRU’s College of Arts and Sciences, its description said that it incorporates information from fields such as biology, chemistry, and computer science. However, I didn’t see physics mentioned anywhere. So, what overlap is there, if any, between neuroscience and physics? Well, I think there’s a lot of overlap. I think that physics addresses fundamental physical laws, and those physical laws apply to every part of biological systems. For example, one of the areas I teach in has to do with electrical signal communication in the nervous system (or in cells in general). And this is important for the way the heart works, outside the nervous system, and also for the way cells function and communicate in the nervous system. And much of those fundamental principles of operation that underlie that signaling is electrical, and the principles that make it possible to understand how it works come from physics. So in physics, there are discussions of basic forces like gravitational forces, magnetic forces, electrical forces, and so on. And in neurons, the cells that make up the nervous system, there are instances where charges are separated in such a way that generate electrical forces. So basically, what I would say to answer your question is that physics is the foundation of much of how things work. Also, I think physics is a great area to study as preparation for trying to understand how biological systems work. Neuroscience and cognitive science are often praised for their interdisciplinary nature and how easy it is to connect them to other fields. Do you believe that if a field is broadened enough, it could exhibit overlap with every other field in existence without stretching it? Well, I think that’s an interesting question, and it’s an interesting qualification that you added at the end: “without stretching it.” I think that what you’re really asking has to do with the structure of human knowledge. Let’s say if you started off and asked, “In sum total, what makes up all of human knowledge?” Well, you can take all of human knowledge, then you can ask, “Are there natural boundaries between subsets of knowledge?” That begs the question: “What do you mean by natural?” I think certainly, historically, there has been a tendency for people to study a circumscribed set of problems. And mathematicians address certain types of problems, physicists address certain types of problems, engineers other types of problems, and so on. And there’s, presumably, a historical basis for that I wouldn’t be able to comment on, but you’re asking whether [or not] there’s a fundamental reason for those separations in human knowledge. Music is an auditory thing, and art (visual art) is a visual thing, and so it would not be surprising that those types of human endeavors — namely appreciation of music, appreciation of art — would be somewhat different because they involve the operation of different senses. So would that be a neurobiological attempt at explaining why some areas of human knowledge and human creativity are separate? So maybe you’re asking, “Are certain topics broader and encompass more things than other topics?” I guess that’s probably true, but what that means, I’ll have to think about. Much of your research over the past thirty years has been focused on a single type of ion: calcium ions. When someone considers pursuing a specific field, do you think they should strive to focus their studies on an aspect as specific as a certain ion? That’s an interesting question. So, I would say that in science, there’s an interplay between an individual who’s doing science and choosing areas to work on in science. There’s an interplay between identifying areas one finds interesting and also areas that one thinks are important and appreciated by society in the sense that they’ll provide funding. So there’s an interplay between those considerations. The reason I started being interested in calcium is because calcium is a really interesting signaling ion in the sense that it participates in so many different biological processes. If you were to ask if there was a single most important chemical in cells in the body that participates in normal function, you might say calcium. For example, when your heart beats or when your skeletal muscles contract, an essential link in the chain between the stimulus that causes them to contract and their ultimate contraction is an increase in the calcium concentration of the cells. In neurons, many different processes are regulated by calcium. We talked about calcium being the thing that helps trigger neurotransmitter release, thereby permitting one neuron to communicate with another neuron, so it’s really important in that sense. I thought it was really interesting because if you think about the physics of calcium handling and calcium movements, two physical forces are important. One is diffusion of calcium along concentration gradients. Calcium also responds to electrical forces, and there’s a science associated with understanding how charged particles move under the influence of electrical forces. Calcium has both of those things operating on it, and it makes it interesting to try to understand what it is that’s making calcium move from one part of the cell to another part of the cell, or from outside the cell and into the cell. I found that fascinating because, for one, it’s important for so many physiological processes, and also because the physical forces are understood in principle but their application to biological systems — where ions are moving — is incompletely understood. So it seemed like a really good place to understand how cellular signaling and communication work, with calcium as an essential intermediate. And also, it would have benefited from applying an understanding of physical forces to biological systems where they may not have been well understood. Going off the previous question, do you believe it’s possible to be too specific in one’s research interests? In other words, do you believe that focusing too much on specifics can distract from the macroscopic issue that facilitated one’s research in the first place? That’s a good question. I don’t think I can give a complete, definitive answer. However, I can give you an example. There’s so much knowledge available now, and the places in which the boundaries of knowledge can be pushed back are pretty far along. For example, an area that I work on is ion channels. Ion channels are an example of where research has gotten very, very focused. But in the process of getting really, really focused, a lot has been learned that’s valuable. It almost comes down to whether [or not] a particular area of research is too focused for one’s personal interests. Ultimately, for science, it comes down to “Do you like that kind of research? Do you want to engage in that type of research?” And if you like really focused research, you should do that. If you don’t like really focused research, then you should do research on some area that’s a bit broader, so there’s a personal element to it. In my scientific lifetime, there were observations that people have made that indicated that there were pathways for ions to get across the membranes of cells in a regulated way that would generate things like action potentials. In blocking action potentials, you would prevent the ability to sense things and prevent the ability to control your muscles, which is very important physiologically and very important medically, and so there was a huge interest in figuring out what these pathways are that promote ions to go through membranes. Some people speculated that there are channels through which the ions go. Other people speculated that there are no channels, and it’s just ions moving through the plasma membrane continuously in some way. Eventually, somebody came up with a technique that made it possible to address that and measure the currents that flow through individual ion channels in the plasma membrane, demonstrating that there were discrete ion channels that would open and close randomly and let ions go through. Right now, everybody knows this, but back when it was first discovered it was a pretty big deal. In fact, the guys who discovered it got a Nobel Prize. Now that it was known that there were ion channels, somebody went and figured out the molecular structure of the ion channels and that they’re proteins that are pretty big and fit in the plasma membrane in a certain way and let ions through in a very interesting way. The purpose of giving you this example was to illustrate how the focus can get very narrow. Now, there are people who study one type of ion channel and how it moves in the plasma membrane and how it may be under the influence of one amino acid. There may be hundreds of amino acids in the protein, but there may be somebody who studies how that one amino acid or changes in that one amino acid influence the way that protein folds, and so on. For me, that seems a little overly focused. But then again, it could be very important, because there are human diseases or syndromes that are associated with mutations in the gene that encodes those channels, leading to modifications of those same amino acids. So, if somebody went in and said, “Ok. How does a mutation in the gene that encodes this ion channel that switches one amino acid in this one place in this one protein produce this really dramatic human disease?”, it’s a good question. Also, if somebody was able to figure it out, they might be in a position to create a drug, or some treatment, that would fix people who have that kind of problem. So, I think, historically, in many cases, the increasing focus on a problem oftentimes opens up and becomes broader and comes up with new things that have applications going well beyond the original focus. The guys who discovered the electron were studying phenomena that they said, amongst themselves, “This is never going to have any practical application, and we pride ourselves on that. We’re doing it because we think it’s really interesting.” Some people, at that time, might’ve thought that this was a narrow focus, but in reality, they discovered that there was a component of all matter that has a charge, has a certain type of size, and participates in the structure of matter. It underlies much of what we do in science and engineering, that knowledge of how electrons work and how they participate in atoms and molecules and chemistry. So, my point here is that it’s really hard to know what “too focused” is. Because sometimes, with increasing focus, you learn more, and you end up opening up areas that you never would have thought were there before. Have you ever made or been close to making a breakthrough discovery in your research? It depends on what you mean by “breakthrough discovery.” I don’t think I’ve made any or been close to making any breakthrough discoveries that other people would say were breakthrough discoveries societally. But I do feel I made some discoveries that were pretty insightful in understanding how calcium is regulated in cells. One of the areas, a subarea of calcium signaling I was interested in and did research in, has to do with how organelles in cells like the mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum take up and release calcium in neurons during or after stimulation. When I started working on that area, there were some confusing ideas floating around in the literature about how it worked, and I think I brought a fair amount of clarity to that through my experiments. I think the experiments were very clear and conclusive. That would be an example of where I made a scientific contribution, but I don’t think I have made contributions like discovering a new element. On the other hand, that wasn’t what I was looking for. That wasn’t what directed my research. What directed my research was what I found interesting, and it’s kind of a luxury to have pursued research that I find interesting, but that’s what I did. Other people might say, “What is the most, absolutely important scientific problem that faces the universe at this particular time?” The stakes are high, and if you discover something, you call it groundbreaking. Then again, if the problems are so huge and important, other people are probably working on them, and it’s very difficult to make progress that goes beyond what other people have done. Going back to the very first question, if your teenage self could see you and your career now, what would he think? I would say, “I’m pretty happy about it.” Have you heard the saying “hindsight is better than foresight”? It’s easier to look back on the basis of things that have happened and that you’ve seen to make suggestions about things like “You might’ve done this a little differently, you might’ve done that a little bit differently.” It’s easier to do that than it is to say, “Here I am, I’m looking into the future. What’s the best way to go forward into the future?” Because the future is unknown, so it’s easier to do the retrospective thing than it is to do the prospective thing. But what would I say if I was graduating from high school? I would say, “That’s pretty interesting.” I always liked to know how things work, and that’s been the thing that has continued. I always like to know how things work. As a kid, I fiddled around with things to see how they work. And that’s what my research has been: how cells handle calcium and use it for signaling. That’s been the common thread. Usually, as a teenager, you don’t necessarily see things the same way you do as you go further in your life. But I might’ve thought it wasn’t so surprising to become a scientist because I like to understand how things work. How did you become an associate professor for CWRU SOM? In my Ph.D. program, there was the question of “What should my research project be?” It’s got to be something new. It’s got to be something that’s useful. You have to carve out an area where you think you can do something useful that hasn’t been done before. You might think “I want to cure cancer.” That’s too big. “I want to solve the climate crisis.” It’s too big for one person to do for a Ph.D. project. You have to identify something that you can actually accomplish. It has a scale that’s doable. In the Ph.D. project, I identified a project that ultimately had to do with calcium signaling in cells in the body. When I was done with that, when I finished the Ph.D. project, the question was what to do next. In science, there’s usually a trajectory: you do a Ph.D., then you do a postdoc — maybe even do two postdocs — and then you apply for a job as a faculty member somewhere. I applied to do postdoctoral research with a couple of different people whose work I respected, and there was an opening in one of these labs, and I went there. The research that I did there had to do with the same kinds of considerations as for the Ph.D. project in the sense that we have to carve out something that’s doable but has the potential of coming up with new information. It had to do with a blend of what I do and also what my postdoctoral mentor knew. The reason you go to do a postdoc is to learn more. You get trained and learn new techniques. And I somewhat understood, in my Ph.D. project, that at that time it was really clear that what you can discover depends on what kinds of techniques you have at your disposal. So I decided to go work with a guy who was really good at making electrical measurements in cells using this technique that the guys got the Nobel Prize for recently, back then. And I learned that technique and applied it to understanding signaling in cells. I did one more postdoc after that, going to work with another guy that had some more that I could learn from. When you work as a postdoc, you have to reach an agreement about what projects you work on with your postdoctoral mentor. Oftentimes, they are the ones who write the grant proposals to get the money to fund the research, so they have some say — justifiably — in deciding how the money is spent and what kind of research is done. But at a certain point, you say, “I have my own ideas, and I want to have my own lab where I decide what research is done.” That’s the time when you start looking for your own research faculty position. I applied to various places, and I decided to come to Case. Why did you decide to come to CWRU? I like environments that are friendly and collaborative, and I felt that the environment at Case was more like that than any of the other places that I had offers from. So, that was the thing that made the decision. I think it’s something that has to be continuously nurtured, so that it stays that way. It’s not in the water. It’s something that there has to be institutional support for, and I think it’s really important to have a continuum. In fact, our neuroscience major is a collaborative effort between two departments and two different schools. You may not know this, but biology is in the College of Arts and Sciences, and neuroscience is in the School of Medicine. Those are two different schools, which are two different entities in the university. They have different administrations. They have many different things. And to have an undergraduate major that represents a collaboration between two departments and two schools is a good example of working together, and I think it’s really important to nurture that environment so people can continue working together. If you learned a lot from this interview, you may learn a lot from my other content as well. Feel free to check it out and hit that clap button (which can be hit a maximum of 50 times for each article, F.Y.I.)!