  Launching Utah K-12 Computer Science and CTE Pathways on CodeHS Supporting computer science education in Utah with the release of new courses, K-12 CTE pathways, and Spanish curriculum for ELLs — all fully aligned to Utah state standards! In Utah’s K-12 education landscape, there have been notable improvements around the integration and emphasis on computer science education. Over the past few years, the state has recognized the growing importance of digital literacy and technological skills for students’ future success. As a result, Utah has taken significant steps to expand computer science offerings in its K-12 schools. This includes introducing coding, programming, and computational thinking concepts from early grades, ensuring a gradual progression of skills as students advance through their education journey. Utah’s commitment to K-12 computer science education reflects a broader national trend recognizing the significance of preparing students for a digital future. By fostering a strong foundation in computer science, Utah aims to empower its students to become not just consumers of technology, but also creators, problem solvers, and innovators, ensuring their readiness for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century. CodeHS has created multiple computer science courses that are fully aligned to Utah’s latest standards and help fulfill requirements in a number of Utah’s CTE pathways, including Programming and Software Development and Web Development. These expansive Utah K-12 pathways include a variety of new computer science courses and Spanish language options on CodeHS: For Elementary While working closely with various districts in Utah, CodeHS has developed an elementary computer science pathway that is fully aligned with Utah standards. Utah Elementary Computer Science Pathway The pathway includes introductory programming lessons, leading to a menu of integrated coding lessons that can be used to reinforce core subject topics of Math, Science, Language Arts and Social Studies. These courses include additional lessons around digital literacy, coding, and open-ended projects, as well. Utah Elementary Pathway For Middle School Utah Middle School Computer Science Pathway The Utah Computer Science pathway for middle school serves as an entry point for any of the Utah CTE pathways, including Programming & Software Development, Web Development, and more. Utah Middle School Pathway Utah Creative Coding Course — 70 hours — JavaScript p5play This course introduces students to game design and programming! Students use the p5play JavaScript library to design, develop, and publish games! Throughout the course, major programming topics like variables, functions, conditionals, and mouse/keyboard events are covered while students build fun and interactive games. Utah Introduction to Python 1 Course–60 hours — Python (Turtle) This course teaches students the basics of programming in Python. Students learn Python commands, functions, control structures, and user interaction by solving puzzles and writing creative programs for Tracy the Turtle to follow. Utah Introduction to Python 2 Course–60 hours — Python (Turtle) This course builds on the Utah Python 1 course, teaching students extended concepts in Python. Students learn how to use lists, manipulate strings, and work with files by solving puzzles and writing creative programs for Tracy to follow. For High School Utah Programming Software Development Pathway The Utah Programming and Software Development Pathway prepares students with essential skills such as critical thinking, computational thinking, problem-solving, and mathematical reasoning. Students will also acquire essential coding skills in various languages to give them a competitive edge in college and careers. Utah Programming and Software Development Pathway (Option 2) Utah Computer Programming 1 Course–60 hours — Python (Console) This course introduces students to the fundamentals of computer programming, with an emphasis on helping students develop logical thinking and problem-solving skills. Students will learn to design, code, and test their programs while applying mathematical concepts. UT Computer Programming 1 is designed for beginners with no previous background in computer science. Utah Computer Programming 2 Course–60 hours — Python (Console) This course introduces students to more advanced programming concepts. Students will learn to create more powerful programs using functions, strings, data structures, file i/o operations, and objects. UT Computer Programming 1 is a prerequisite for this course. Utah Game Development Fundamentals 1 Course–80 hours — Unity This optional first-semester course teaches the fundamentals of designing a game using the most widely accessed and preferred editing engine in the world — Unity. The intent of this course is to introduce high school students to the industry-related skills needed for the workplace and higher learning environments. By the end of this course, they will understand the design planning process, be knowledgeable of industry-related careers, and be able to navigate the Unity environment in order to create 3D games. Utah Web Development Pathway The Web Development Pathway includes work that involves creating, designing, and producing interactive multimedia products and services. Students in this Pathway learn and practice skills that give them college credit, and industry certifications, and prepare them for industry work and beyond. Utah Web Development Pathway Utah Web Development I Course — 65 hours — HTML This course is intended to teach students the fundamentals of web design and development in a project-based learning environment. Students will learn the basic elements of web development, creating HTML/CSS files, and making multi-page websites. Over the course of one semester, students will collaboratively and independently design, develop, and implement functional web pages using these foundational skills. Utah Web Development II Course — 75 hours — HTML This course is intended to teach students the fundamentals of web design and development in a project-based learning environment. Students will learn the basic elements of web development, such as web hosting, creating HTML/CSS files, and incorporating Javascript into HTML files. Over the course of the semester, students will collaboratively and independently design, develop, and implement functional and responsive web pages using these foundational skills. Now Supporting Spanish-Speaking ELLs in the Computer Science Classroom! CodeHS is proud to offer a computer science curriculum designed to support Spanish-speaking English Language Learners! This update is available for all the Utah K–12 courses on CodeHS and is designed to integrate seamlessly into blended learning environments. Learn more. How It Works Teachers can choose between English and Spanish in course settings, and students can easily select their preferred language in their individual settings. Learn how to manage your course language settings here. Learn More For districts in Utah looking to build a vertically aligned K-12 computer science pathway or expand an existing program, CodeHS is here to help. Visit codehs.com/utah to explore more of the courses available or reach out to our team at hello@codehs.com. If you’re a middle or high school teacher, start exploring these courses right away by creating a free CodeHS teacher account today.