 5 Ivy League Computer Science and Engineering Degrees you can earn online on Coursera in 2024 These are top 5 computer science and engineering degrees you can join online on Coursera from Ivy League Universities image_credit- Coursera Degree program Hello guys, a lot of my readers were asking this question, is it possible to get a computer science degree online? How much is the charge? is it cheaper than any regular university degree? is it recognized worldwide? will I get employment using this degree, and how much time I need to spend daily, etc? These are a lot of questions about online degrees but I have been receiving them for quite some time and now the frequency has even increased. The short answer to this question is, Yes, now it’s possible to earn a Master of Computer Science degree 100% online. Things are changing in the education space and they are changing at really fast speed.
 
Gone are the days where you need to sit on the entrance exam, pay hefty fees for coaching classes, and attend a 3 to 4-year full-time college to earn a computer science degree. Now, you can get the same Computer Science and Programming degree online at the comfort of your home, office, or wherever you are.
 
This is tremendously useful and cost-saving as you don’t need to quit your job, leave your house or country to get a highly recognized professional computer science degree, and all this is possible because of Coursera, an online platform which brings quality education from reputed university for common people over the internet.
 
Initially, I was a bit skeptical about online degree programs and always wondered, is this really possible? Is it valid and authentic? But, after reading about it on the Internet and Coursera in particular, I am now thinking it’s a great way to increase your educational credentials.
 
I know many of my colleagues who have started working on the IT field after than Bacher of Engineering (B.E.) degree. Many of them wanted to earn a master’s degree like M.Tech or MBA from a reputed university, but they were always afraid to leave jobs and go for their dream.
 
In many cases, it wasn’t even practical to leave a job for pursuing a master’s degree as many of them were married and some of them even had kids. Now all of them can look at this option and can fulfill their dream by joining online degree programs from world’s reputed university on Coursera. Online Degrees and Postgraduate Studies from Top Universities | Coursera
Find the right online degree for you Degrees from leading universities Explore more degrees by category We partner with…coursera.pxf.io Top 5 Computer Science and Engineer Degrees on Coursera in 2024 In this article, I am going to share many Ivy league computer science and Engineer degrees offered by the reputed universities of the USA and all over the world like the University of Illinois’s Master of Computer Science degree to become a Software engineer. These are completely online degree and you can take it from wherever you are and from the comfort of your office and hone. You can also research more on Coursera and the Internet in general. Here are the most popular Computer Science and Engineer degrees from Coursera: 1. Illinois’s Master of Computer Science degree on Coursera A couple of days ago I received an email from Coursera about the Online Master of Computer Science (MCS) program from the University of Illinois, one of the best universities in the USA and worldwide. Their Computer Science program is also one of the top-five Computer Science graduate programs at the forefront of excellence in computing and education. This email inspired me to learn more about the possibility of earning a computer science degree online and write this article. Since many of my readers were curious about whether an online degree is as useful and a campus degree or not, the answer is Yes, both are actually the same degree.
 
Here is the link to learn more about this online degree program — Master of Computer Science (MCS) program from Illinois  In this particular program, you can choose to study a variety of areas in CS or specialize in data sciences using our program’s MCS-Data Science track. The most important part is that degree is delivered 100% online, providing the flexibility for you to learn on your own schedule, on any device, from anywhere.
 
When you finish the program in only 12–36 months, you’ll earn the same degree as MCS students who study on campus. And it’s a great value at a total cost of less than $22K USD. The cost is seriously very less when you compare with on-campus costs for the same degree and forget about accommodation, travel, and other expenses. So, what are you waiting for, deepen your knowledge, and boost your career with a degree from a top-5 Computer Science graduate program in the U.S. The degree is now open for registration and they are accepting registration. Master of Computer Science (MCS) | UIUC
Source: US News and World Report and Fortune Earning your master's degree with the pioneering University of Illinois…coursera.pxf.io 2. Master of Computer and Information Technology from the University of Pennsylvania This is another Ivy league computer science and information technology degree that is open for registration now on Coursera. This degree is offered by the University of Pennsylvania and it brings the long-running, established on-campus MCIT degree online. What makes this degree unique? Ivy League Quality 
This is a first-of-its-kind program that offers an Ivy League master’s degree in Computer Science designed for non-CS majors. Built Around Your Schedule 
The coursework is 100 percent online. You’ll benefit from the same high-quality instruction as on-campus students and graduate with the same degree. The diploma does not indicate whether the degree was earned online or on-campus. Accessible Pricing 
The cost of the MCIT Online degree is significantly less than on-campus alternatives and most online master’s degrees in Computer Science. Students pay $2,636 per course unit for a total of 10-course units. Tuition and fees are posted as a guide and may be subject to change. Real-world, project-based learning 
Core courses and electives blend computer science theory and applied project-based learning. You’ll have the chance to use real-world tools and environments such as TensorFlow and Amazon Cloud. Faculty Access 
You’ll get access to world-renowned instructors through discussion forums and live office hours. Try before you apply 
Penn Engineering offers an online Computational Thinking for Problem Solving course on Coursera to help you decide whether the program is the right fit before you apply. Here is the link to join this degree online — Master of Computer and Information Technology from the University of Pennsylvania  3. Online Master of Computer Science Degree from Arizona State University This is another online degree from another Ivy League university which is offered online. This online Computer science degree from Arizona State University is one of the top 10 degrees for Online Graduate Engineering Programs by U.S. News and World Report. The Master of Computer Science (MCS) degree program from Arizona State University provides high-quality instruction combined with real-world experience through applied projects. You’ll gain a deep understanding of cutting-edge topics like AI, cybersecurity, blockchain, and big data. This degree is delivered 100% online, providing the flexibility for you to learn on your own schedule. Upon completion, you’ll earn the same degree as students who study on-campus. Here is the link to join this degree online —Online Master of Computer Science Degree from Arizona State University  4. Bachelor of Computer Science from the University of London If you are looking for a Bachelor's online computer science degree then you don’t need to disappoint. You can also earn a Bachelor in Computer Science or BSc or BCS degree online on Coursera. This Bachelor of Computer Science degree is offered by none other than but University of London. The University of London, established by Royal Charter in 1836, is a globally recognized learning institution. It’s a 3–6 year long degree with 23 modules and 14 to 28 hours per week of learning. Here is the link to learn more about this degree — Bachelor of Computer Science from the University of London  5. Master of Science in Electrical Engineering If you are looking for an Electrical Engineering online degree then there is no better than the Master of Science in Electrical Engineering offered by the University of Colorado Boulder. This online MS-EE degree is intended for anyone looking to grow their careers in the electrical engineering industry or who wants to learn more in the field of electrical engineering. Graduates of the Master of Science in Electrical Engineering program have gone on to become engineers at Intel, Lockheed Martin, Tesla, Google, and more Here is the link to learn more about this degree — Master of Science in Electrical Engineering  Apart from these online degree programs, two more which I found worth considering are related to Data Science. If you want to earn a degree in Data Science in 2024 then you can checkout following degree programs on Coursera: Maser fo Computer Science in Data Science from the University of Illinois Master of Science in Data Science from the University of Colorado Boulder And, if you find Coursera courses useful, which they are because they are created by reputed companies like Google, IBM, Amazon, and best universities around the world, I suggest you join the Coursera Plus, a subscription plan from Coursera Coursera Plus | Unlimited Access to 7,000+ Online Courses
Invest in your professional goals with Coursera Plus. Get Unlimited access to over 90% of courses, Projects…coursera.pxf.io This single subscription gives you unlimited access to their most popular courses, specialization, professional certificate, and guided projects. It cost around $399/year but its complete worth of your money as you get unlimited certificates. These are the best online Ivy League bachelor’s and master’s degree programs in Computer Science you can earn online on Coursera. These are designed for students without a Computer Science background. They are completely online and duration is 16–60 months but the cost is from $15000 to $25000 which is cheaper than the actual University program.
 
Btw, not all universities offer their Bachelor’s and Master's' degree program online, but the number is slowly growing and I am sure, more universities will join once people start believing that online degrees are also legitimate and there is no compromise on quality and educational material. You can check Coursera’s online degree portal for more online bachelor and master’s degree programs from the world’s top universities.  There are universities that also offer Business degrees like MBA, which is great for senior developers looking to go into product, people, and project management areas.
 
 
That’s all about Top 5 Computer Science and Engineering Degrees you can earn online on Coursera. Online learning is a great way to deeps your knowledge and boosts your career. It’s also very cost-effective as you don’t need a Visa, you don’t need to go to the USA or any other foreign country or state.
 
You can also save a lot of money in lodging and boarding and get the degree from the comfort of your home. It’s also a great option for those who are working but want to upgrade themselves as they can now earn a degree from their office and home.
 
 Other Programming and Career Articles you may like The Complete DevOps Developer RoadMap 10 Coursera Certificate to start your career in IT 10 Coursera Courses and Certifications to Learn Python Top 5 Courses to Learn Jenkins for Automation and DevOps 10 Free Docker Courses for Java and DevOps Professionals 11 Essentials Skills Every Programmer Should Learn 10 Tools Java Developers Should Learn in 2024 7 Free Courses to learn Kubernetes in Depth Best Python Certifications for Beginners from Coursera Pluralsight vs Udemy vs Coursera Review Does Coursera, edX or Udemy Certificate add value to your CV Thanks for reading this article so far. If you like these best online degree courses from Coursera then please share it with your friends and colleagues. If you have any questions or feedback then please drop a note.
 
P. S. — If you are wondering about other Programming and Computer Science degrees that you can earn online then I strongly suggest you check out these Computer Science and Engineering degrees on Coursera, one of the best places for authentic degrees and certification from the worlds’ top University and Colleges. Online Degrees and Postgraduate Studies from Top Universities | Coursera
Find the right online degree for you Degrees from leading universities Explore more degrees by category We partner with…coursera.pxf.io