 ‘Science is for Everyone’: Katie Couric on the Importance of Science and Telling Human Stories Photo Credit: Kevin Lynch On March 20th, 3M released findings from its 2019 State of Science Index which surveyed 14,025 people across 14 countries about how science is perceived across the globe. From how science is communicated to the future of science’s impact on our lives, the report shows startling results when it comes to how science is viewed. “The vast majority of people see the same opportunity with science that we see every day at 3M. The world needs science more than ever to help solve the toughest challenges facing the planet,” said Mike Roman, 3M’s chief executive officer in a press release. “At the same time, science needs advocates who can unite to show how the field makes a difference in people’s lives.” This year, journalist and author Katie Couric teamed up with 3M to increase awareness surrounding the State of Science report and highlight the importance of science in our daily lives. Smart Girls spoke to Katie over the phone about the results of the report, the importance of science in our daily lives, and how storytelling can change how we view the world around us. SMART GIRLS: Why do you think that science is under-appreciated and seems to be under attack when it comes to funding and skepticism? Basically, why do we need to have a study like this every year? Katie Couric: Well, I think they’re sort of multifactorial reasons for people’s perceptions of science, to say it in a very science-y way. I think that skepticism has increased by three percentage points internationally and by six percentage points domestically. I think that’s because, first of all, we have a very noisy, news space and I think important topics often get drowned out. I think that there’s increasing skepticism towards intellectualism and that the people who are academics and educated and have expertise in a certain area — because of the rise of populism — are not as appreciated or respected. There’s kind of reverse snobbery going on towards people who are in this arena. So I think that’s one of the reasons. I think sometimes scientists aren’t as good as they could be in translating complicated, technical research into relatable, understandable, information for people so they can digest it and understand it. I think with the media landscape being what it is and our attention spans shrinking, sometimes these are complicated topics and they’re not given the kind of context and perspective and historical significance that they need to be given; or they’re not quite explained as fully as they could be explained. And I think we need more scientist journalists, I think we need journalists who have scientific backgrounds because one thing Tom Friedman once said to me: “to explain something simply, you have to understand it deeply.” And so I think we need people who are really good at translating these complicated topics in very understandable, relatable ways. Photo Credit: 3M SG: In the report, some adults said that they didn’t feel smart enough to pursue science as a career. How do you feel we can all work to make sure that young people specifically don’t grow up feeling that same way about science and math? KC: Well, they follow the lead of their parents I think. So parents have to be really careful about how they talk to their kids about science. I think they need to be extremely positive. They should not communicate their lack of confidence or their discomfort in science. You know, a lot of parents inadvertently say, “Oh, I’m not a math or science person.” And I think that impacts children and they think, well maybe I’m not smart enough to be a math or science person either. So I think we really need to make sure that science doesn’t seem “pie in the sky” or unattainable or the property of only super brainiacs. “Science is for everyone. And I think we also have to ignite that passion for science at a very early age.” — Katie Couric So when you’re with your five-year-old and you’re walking around the park, you can talk about soil, you can talk about flowers, you can talk about the effect of sunlight on plants and chlorophyll and photosynthesis and things like that. You probably don’t want to talk to a five year old about photosynthesis but I think you can spark curiosity and interest in the world around you because science is everywhere. And so I think through education, through schools, through interacting with kids at home, I think we have to give science a bit of rebranding and show that it’s for everyone and it’s accessible and that everyone can succeed in it, if they’re interested, and become passionate about it. We just can’t douse the passion too soon. We have to cultivate it. Photo Credit: 3M SG: I know that one way you and 3M are trying to break down these barriers is through personal stories and storytelling. And a lot of your work throughout your career has focused on telling human stories. How do you feel that approach could uniquely work on these issues? KC: Well, I think that there’s so much about storytelling. First of all, you know, Viola Davis became an actress because she saw Cicely Tyson in The Autobiography of Ms. Jane Pittman. Before that, growing up, she never saw an actor who looked like her in anything and suddenly it opened her eyes and opened up possibilities for her. Similarly, I think we can tell stories. As you know, because of what you do, there is a dearth of girls and people of color going into STEM. And so part of it is we have to show, we have to tell stories and give examples and role models of those people excelling in science. I mean, think of what Hidden Figures did. It’s funny because I did an hour for National Geographic on gender inequality and just having that movie Hidden Figures reveal how brilliant these women were at NASA and how critically important they were, I’m sure changed a lot of people’s perceptions of who could be an astrophysicist or a scientist at NASA. A friend of mine said her little five-year-old daughter was walking down the street and saw three African American women approaching and she said, “Look, mommy: astronauts.” So all of these things can interrupt the kind of stereotypical cultural conditioning that we get really almost right out of the womb. We have to interrupt these associations and the implicit bias that forms in terms of opening people’s eyes to the possibilities of what they can do. That’s a long way of saying we have to show female engineers. We have to show physicists of color. We have to tell how they got into it. We have to give people a roadmap and we have to inspire people and show how much they love what they’re doing and how important it is. And I think you do that through storytelling that has some emotional core. You can read all of the findings of the 2019 State of Science Index on 3M’s website. Follow Katie on Twitter, Instagram, and sign up for her daily newsletter on her website. Interview has been lightly edited for clarity and length.