 From political science and economics researcher to a programmer — Career Transition with Udacity  Who am I? I am a researcher, published novelist, linguist and social sciences enthusiast who loves to combine the worlds of the quantitative and qualitative for novel insights. I have worked primarily in the development sector for the poor and underprivileged across a range of organizations- the Reserve Bank of India, the Harvard Kennedy School, the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation and most recently, at QUEST Alliance. In all these roles and during my studies at the University of London, I have been harnessing economics and data analysis for improved interventions in education, financial inclusion and good governance. I also speak 11 languages. Lately, I have been working on combining them with my new programming skills to capture voices from communities that usually go unheard by policymakers. How I stumbled upon Udacity? I had just returned from the UK with a Master’s Degree in Economics. I had learnt some specific programming in a language called Stata. But only in my last month in London, I befriended a machine learning expert who opened my eyes to how these technologies could be applied creatively and in designing applications. As a student of Political Science, English Literature and Economics at St. Xavier’s College, I had for many years told myself that general coding was for engineers. Not my cup of tea. But I realized I was the one being robotic in my thinking. As I began to apply for my first jobs in India from home, I stumbled upon Udacity videos on Python. The rest is history. What I inspired me to chose Udacity? Back in 2014, when I first stumbled on Udacity, there weren’t as many players in the data science education field as you see today. While many courses were teaching programming languages through game design, I liked how grounded Udacity’s courses and exercises were in real-world data. Everything from Beatles discography to Enron fraud to diamond quality and Hans Rosling’s famous animated visualization of health and economic statistics. I particularly loved how in several courses, we would see interviews with actual practitioners, and read their work in the context of our learning. It all felt so tangible. And necessary. When I eventually signed up as a paid student in November 2016, I had felt the need to link concepts in the classroom to actual problems at my workplace. Udacity does an excellent job of providing support. Their new feature of line Q&A truly is a blessing- I’d have finished much faster if I’d joined with that kind of support. And it’s a testament to the quality of Udacity’s work that much of the content I saw back in 2014 remains as relevant in 2017. I’m both at the cutting edge, and yet fully immersed in the unchanging core of the subject. How Udacity helped me in my career? For one thing, I received a promotion. I had become stuck doing a lot of technology contract management and technical administration. Which would be fine per se, but felt disconnected from all my experiences before it. Starting with database design in late 2016 (using the Data Wrangling course), I proved my mettle in the analytics domain. I was then assigned the designation of a ‘Data Specialist’. I have continued to lead my department with the latest in the field this year- including making Tableau, R and qualitative software a mainstay of our work. Work on visualization also allowed me to shape my role closer to communication- which ties in with my love of languages and writing. Very recently, I got to see my new skills leading to social impact in person. At QUEST Alliance, we often collected data from our partner organizations on the ground. Then we would run our analyses and take decisions accordingly. But by using interactive and easy to use platforms like Tableau to share our findings, we were able to help those field partners take decisions too. In our Anandshala programme, we work with teachers, principals and various government officials to turn government schools into joyful learning spaces. In one of the rural schools we visited in Samastipur district of Bihar, the headmaster talked about how he managed his various duties and pointed at thick attendance registers. When we digitized that same data, cleaned it in Python, explored it in R and visualized it on Tableau, we could show them some charts with clear trends on my laptop. Those trends would have been impossible to notice just from the written entries in the register.  We could now see that students would who came to school did engage with classroom learning and did not run away as soon as they had the Midday Meal. But by comparing against the enrollment numbers, we could see that we could not be sure how many students would come in which month, especially around the festive season and floods. Even the principal’s supervisor- a Cluster Resource Centre Coordinator stood transfixed. She immediately asked for us to send more such data analyses to help them improve their schools’ performance. So for anyone who thinks that all government schools and those in charge of them do not care about the quality of education, perhaps it’s time for a rethink. Armed with timely data and the tools to find insights from it, the possibilities are truly limitless. Even in places many people have given up hope on. I thank Udacity for allowing me to savour that moment with those teachers in a small sunlit school in the middle of cowsheds and verdant paddy fields. Where my own data science training was in some way helping hundreds of poor, underprivileged children with their basic education. So that we could give them the opportunity to discover their potential and stand a fair chance in the world, and bring a smile to them and their parents’ faces. Tips for Nanodegree students Readymade libraries in Python, R and Javascript make life so easy. All the complex analysis happens under the hood. You only need to provide each a few arguments. And voila, you have your results. But this in no way means you can turn your brain off. If anything, it has to be running on full power. The only difference is now you can focus on the ‘why’ instead of the ‘how’. As the Nanodegree emphasized several times -especially in the Machine Learning course- it’s critical to keep questioning your assumptions, understand parameters of models and the results of tweaking them and to state why you decided on a particular algorithm over all other alternatives. Data science, like design, is an iterative process. You aren’t going to nail the perfect database normalization strategy, machine learning features or visualization in the first attempt. But reach out for feedback, and keep adapting accordingly. In the case of Udacity, that means that many seemingly perfect assignments will be sent back to with several corrections. At work, your colleagues may ask you to go right back to square one. Either way, don’t be disheartened. It’s just part of the process. And you will grow to love it, like I did! Mahatma Gandhi saw it years ago- ‘Do or Die’. You can consume countless videos and Stack Overflow posts. But until you actually do, that is- write your code- you’ll never grow. Will it be easy? Absolutely not. But the only error here is to not err. Embrace the red console text and your own reddening face. Frustration is part of the game, but stick with it. It’s only when you make your peace with getting no quick results, that you get results. Also, unlike real world languages, the one listening isn’t as forgiving of typos. Use your text editor- they’re a godsend! No one walks up to you and talks in Python. So ‘speak’ the language as often as you can. At least in my case, I had to write the same code multiple times before it all sank in. Apply your coding beyond your projects to issues around you that you deeply care about. Or if you’re in Bangalore, learn from the best in data science at DataKind Bangalore’s meetup events. Luckily for me, my day job offered plenty of opportunities in this regard. But with all the new data sets becoming available for download, go ahead and play!