 The Future of Sports: Peter Sibner of Elite Prospects On The New Emerging Technologies That Are Disrupting The World Of Sports  Experience is usually not something you, or other people, fully appreciate and understand until you have it yourself. Not everything has to happen right now. Patience really is a virtue, and this links back to experience once more. New technologies have changed the way we engage in and watch sports. Sensors, Wearable Tech, Video Assistant Referees (VAR), and Instant Replay, are examples of new technologies that have changed the way we play and watch sports. In this interview series called, “The Future of Sports; New Emerging Technologies That Are Disrupting The World Of Sports,” we are talking to sports leaders, athletes, sports tech experts, and sports equipment companies who can talk about the new technologies that are reshaping the sports world. As a part of this interview, we had the pleasure of interviewing Peter Sibner. Peter Sibner is President, ESMG North America of Elite Prospects, the world’s leading ice hockey information resource that provides in-depth statistics and sophisticated data-driven tools for over one million players, and offering a groundbreaking enterprise solution to professional hockey organizations. Thank you so much for joining us in this interview series! Before we dive in, our readers would love to “get to know you” a bit better. Can you tell us a bit about your ‘backstory’ and how you got started? Growing up in Sweden, it’s hard to not be passionate about ice hockey: the sport is everywhere. As a kid, I was always a sports fanatic and played hockey myself. But I probably loved reading and telling the stories around the game even more, and worked as a local journalist through high school. After college, I started my career in the golf industry before I went on to management consulting and recruitment. But my passion for hockey and media always remained strong. Since joining Everysport in 2012, my role has changed with the growth of the company, from running our sports publishing business while also being a columnist and editor of a few of hockey titles, to taking on the international business development of Elite Prospects. Can you share the most interesting story that happened to you since you began your career? Early on in my career at Everysport, I was writing hockey columns as a volunteer in my free time. Based on my output, I was voted ‘Columnist of the Year’ by Swedish hockey media. Shortly after, our owner called me and asked if I wanted to run the company. That’s why you should always follow your passions! Can you please give us your favorite “Life Lesson Quote”? Can you share how that was relevant to you in your life? Do what you love and never work a day in your life. I’m fortunate enough to have found what I love and forged a career from it. None of us are able to achieve success without some help along the way. Is there a particular person who you are grateful towards who helped get you to where you are? Can you share a story about that? My first boss at management consulting firm Universum, Niklas Bragee. He met me whilst he was on a golf vacation, and subsequently hired me to a global company filled with people from elite universities. He believed in me, despite being a college dropout with a failed golf career, and we ended up working together for ten years, helping to build two great companies. I am so grateful for my employees Uffe Bodin and Johan Nilsson who have worked tirelessly alongside me for over a decade to build the hockey portfolio of Everysport to what it is today. Is there a particular book, film, or podcast that made a significant impact on you? Can you share a story or explain why it resonated with you so much? Dead Poets Society. I saw it when I was 11 years old and it led me to always question authority and to follow my passion and talent rather than unthinkingly succumb to expectation. Allow yourself to dream and chase that dream. You are a successful business leader. Which three character traits do you think were most instrumental to your success? As mentioned, much of where I am today is dependent on my passion for hockey. I always suggest that people follow their interests as much as possible, whether it’s sports or driving a car or playing the guitar or drinking wine — there is a pretty good chance your hobby is part of a sizable industry that would benefit from your passion. Everysport and Elite Prospects are entirely built by people like that. Find talented people who share your passion and make great things together. They say hard work beats talent when talent doesn’t work hard, but talent that works hard is unstoppable. I have always taken great pride in my ability to find passionate people and give them the tools to thrive. Lastly, perseverance. Elite Prospects took a decade to become a profitable operation, then another decade to be a dominant force at the top of the hockey world. Most founders would have given up, certainly most owners, but our founder, owners and I have always believed in the massive potential of our brand. How have you used your success to bring goodness to the world? One of the initiatives I am most proud of is Elite Prospects’ mission to promote the women’s game. There is still a lot of work to be done to bring equality to the game, and this is as much of a focus of ours going forward as it has been for the better part of a decade. The formation of the PWHL is a really exciting prospect for the women’s game and we’re doing everything we can to bring visibility to the league. Ok wonderful. Let’s now shift to the main focus of our interview. Can you tell us about the sports technologies that most excite you at the moment? Can you explain why you are passionate about it? I believe video tracking and wearables data will continue to expand in sports tech. It is something we look to incorporate at Elite Prospects too, especially as it becomes cheaper, more commonplace and as such making these metrics available for scouting and recruitment even at levels below the NHL and professional leagues. How do you think this might change the world of sports? Data is revolutionizing hockey, and its potential is vast. Player data and analytics can tell us things that may be missed by the human eye — they quantify performance in a way that is otherwise impossible. It has also changed how scouting, recruitment and development happens in the game and we have a large role to play there. Keeping “Black Mirror” in mind, can you see any potential drawbacks about this technology that people should think more deeply about? The technology required for in-depth player analysis and performance tracking may prove prohibitively expensive for some teams, therefore widening the gap between teams with money and those without. However, we are also seeing this technology becoming far more accessible the more standard it becomes. What are the 3 things that concern you about the sports industry today? Can you explain? What can be done to address or correct those concerns? I don’t know if I could come up with three! The sports industry is in a fascinating place right now as we are experiencing a technological overhaul that is allowing us to study the game in a level of detail that was completely unprecedented ten years ago. However, we know there is a level of concern from fans that sports clubs are becoming too commercially-minded. Sports is, of course, a mix between creating a community and giving back to the fans — the people who truly matter to the club — and running a business. It is a fine line to tread, but there are many examples of hockey clubs that do this very well.  Fantastic. Here is the main question of our interview. What are your “5 Things I Wish Someone Told Me Before I Started” and why? Not everyone appreciates good ideas or high energy; it’s important to read the room. In a group of talented people, you become obsolete very quickly if you don’t keep up. Challenge yourself. Experience is usually not something you, or other people, fully appreciate and understand until you have it yourself. Not everything has to happen right now. Patience really is a virtue, and this links back to experience once more. You can always find a way to successfully work with people you don’t get along with if you agree that you have differences which likely won’t be resolved. You are a person of great influence. If you could inspire a movement that would bring the most amount of good to the most amount of people, what would that be? You never know what your idea can trigger. ‘Make Reading Great Again’. I myself am a voracious reader and find that many of my best ideas are inspired by seemingly inconsequential reading. We are very blessed that very prominent leaders read this column. Is there a person in the world, or in the US with whom you would like to have a private breakfast or lunch, and why? I would have breakfast with Gary Bettman, lunch with Paul Bissonnette, and dinner & drinks with Jeremy Roenick. They are three of the people to have had the largest impact on the NHL, and could be considered heroes of mine. How can our readers further follow your work online? Readers can access Elite Prospects via our website, as well as keeping up to date with our Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook. We also publish more in-depth analysis and content via our editorial publication, EP Rinkside. Thank you for these fantastic insights. We greatly appreciate the time you spent on this.