 HOAX: This purported Ministry of Sports site offering development grants is a scam The website does not belong to the Ministry of Sports and it has the hallmarks of a phishing scam.  This website mimicking Kenya’s Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports, and offering youth development grants is a HOAX. The link to the site has been shared on WhatsApp, with users being asked to click for details on eligibility and application procedure. “TThe government has approved a grant amount of [3,000KSH] to be paid to all youths,All those who wish to apply for the grant can do so by submiting their application online (sic),” the message reads.  However, clicking on the link as instructed does not direct a user to the legitimate website of the Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports, whose domain name is moyasa.go.ke. Instead, the link gives direction to another website whose domain name is Portalreg.store. The website has the Government of Kenya coat of arms and an image of Sports Cabinet Secretary Ababu Namwamba.  A message on the web page invites applicants to fill out the provided form by indicating their names, telephone numbers, and email addresses. The message adds that to be eligible for the grant, the applicant must be a Kenyan citizen between 18–35 years old.  Clicking on the “Apply” button opens another page requiring the applicant to provide information on their age and gender. Subsequently, a new page pops up with the message that the application has been successful. However, for the applicants to redeem the grant, they have to share the information with five WhatsApp groups or 15 friends.  This sequence has the hallmarks of a phishing scam aimed at mining people’s personal information and carrying out click fraud. There is no information about the giveaway on the legitimate website of the Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports, its Facebook page, and X (formerly Twitter) account. The WHOIS information about the imposter website shows that it was registered in Iceland on 6 December 2023, and the information about the organisation that owns it has been hidden.  The WHOIS information of the legitimate website Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports shows its registration date as 28 July 2023. The website is registered under the State Department for Sports in Nairobi, Kenya.  Both the Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports and the National Youth Council Kenya disowned the imposter website via Facebook posts on 14 March 2024 and urged the public to disregard it.  PesaCheck examined the website mimicking Kenya’s Ministry of Youth Affairs, Creative Economy and Sports, and offering youth development grants, and found it to be a HOAX. This post is part of an ongoing series of PesaCheck fact-checks examining content marked as potential misinformation on Facebook and other social media platforms. By partnering with Facebook and similar social media platforms, third-party fact-checking organisations like PesaCheck are helping to sort fact from fiction. We do this by giving the public deeper insight and context to posts they see in their social media feeds. Have you spotted what you think is fake or false information on Facebook? Here’s how you can report. And, here’s more information on PesaCheck’s methodology for fact-checking questionable content.  This fact-check was written by PesaCheck senior fact-checker Simon Muli and edited by PesaCheck senior copy editor Cédrick Irakoze and acting chief copy editor Francis Mwaniki. The article was approved for publication by PesaCheck’s managing editor Doreen Wainainah.  PesaCheck is East Africa’s first public finance fact-checking initiative. It was co-founded by Catherine Gicheru and Justin Arenstein, and is being incubated by the continent’s largest civic technology and data journalism accelerator: Code for Africa. It seeks to help the public separate fact from fiction in public pronouncements about the numbers that shape our world, with a special emphasis on pronouncements about public finances that shape government’s delivery of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) public services, such as healthcare, rural development and access to water / sanitation. PesaCheck also tests the accuracy of media reportage. To find out more about the project, visit pesacheck.org. Follow Us Like Us Email Us WhatsApp Us PesaCheck is an initiative of Code for Africa, through its innovateAFRICA fund, with support from Deutsche Welle Akademie, in partnership with a coalition of local African media and other civic watchdog organisations.