 Aligning Sales and Marketing There’s so much talk about aligning sales and marketing, and all the challenges that coincide with this seemingly impossible endeavor. Frankly, as a long-time Chief Marketing Officer, I’ve never had issues keeping sales and marketing aligned. Although, there have been individuals who have tried to buck the system. Everyone rows together. And not rowing is not an option. Quick Story: After being hired as the Chief Marketing Officer for a private equity-funded, early-stage enterprise software firm in the Midwest, before my start date, the company hired a VP of Sales who was relocating from the Silicon Valley. Three weeks later, this sales professional had moved from California and started work. I gave Alex a warm welcome, let him know after he had a few days to settle in, we’d sit down together to talk and set a date and time. He said, “Good, I look forward to it!” After exchanging pleasantries and listening to details about his relocation, our conversation turned to business matters. I began telling him I don’t micromanage executives and give them almost complete autonomy. I always welcome new ideas and ask them to provide sound business rationale that supports their ideas. In addition, while we’d be interacting almost daily, just like the other individuals who report to me, I need a brief, informal status report at the end of each week, merely providing an overview of the proverbial “lay of the land” for me to utilize for my status reports to the CEO. Suddenly, Alex abruptly shot up out of his chair and loudly exclaimed, “I don’t report to you! I report to Sara!” Surprised, I asked if that’s what the HR department told him. Without responding, Alex bolted down the hall for the CEO’s office. A few minutes later, he walked past my office looking defeated, went into his office, and slammed the door. Soon after, from my office window, I saw him leave the building, get into his car and zoom out of the parking lot. WTF? Sara, the CEO, came down the hall, popped into my office, and told me about Alex asking who he reported to, then storming out when told he was to report to Stephen, the company’s Chief Marketing Officer. Sara went to Alex’s office, saw he wasn’t there, and asked if he’d been back to meet with me. “No, he just left in his car.” Sara and I both wondered if Alex would ever return. The following morning, he came in with a big chip on his shoulder and an indignant demeanor, both of which were prevalent for a few months. However, sales and marketing were well aligned and operated effectively. What Just Happened? Even though Sara was only two years into her first stint as a CEO, she wouldn’t let a member of the executive team “go rogue” because of a bruised ego. The CFO/COO, CTO, CIO, an executive assistant, and me as the CMO were already reporting to the CEO, and that was the number of direct reports she was comfortable with at that time. While Sara was still a newbie as a CEO, she’d been a practicing medical doctor the previous 20+ years and was very diplomatic with a warm bedside manner. Managing a big-headed sales executive paled in comparison to years of dealing with narcissistic surgeons, power-hungry hospital administrators, or delivering a grim prognosis to a patient. The Elephant in the Room What goes wrong in companies that causes the alignment of sales and marketing to increasingly veer off-track? It’s an organizational behavior problem, and in short, CEOs put up with defiance. They tolerate sales executives pushing back against a simple fact that makes them uncomfortable — sales is a function of marketing. “The business enterprise has two –and only two — basic functions: marketing and innovation. Marketing and innovation produce results; all the rest are costs. Marketing is the distinguishing, unique function of the business.” ~Peter Drucker The advent of the Chief Revenue Officer title used for the senior-most executive responsible for sales may or may not report to the CEO; that’s a decision for the CEO, corporate board, and/or business owner(s). However, this is situational, and there’s a strong propensity for the Chief Marketing Officer to be responsible for growing companies’ revenue. Stronger Together Unity is Strength Regardless of their job titles, the top-ranking individuals responsible for sales and marketing must be in lock-step with each other professionally. No, that doesn’t mean their families have to vacation together. It means there’s professional cooperation between them and their departments and a comprehensive understanding there should be absolutely no rivalry between the two executives or any individuals in their charge. Whether these executives are company employees or functioning in their roles as highly-experienced consultants, there are job descriptions or agreements defining the scope of work. That is, these individuals will be held accountable for their performance, which will be measured in part on the behavior they consistently demonstrate, depicting genuine unity. Flying In Unison to a Clear Destination Leaders Choose to Lead The leadership team must make it known throughout the organization that collaboration between marketing and sales is imperative — and why. And management needs to articulate macro-level objectives across their departments so everyone within the organization has a rock-solid understanding of what the companies’ goals are, what the destination is, and how the company plans to reach its clear destination. This level of understanding needs to down through the company so every person in the organization comprehends the importance of their specific role — and how their responsibilities contribute to the big picture — each spoke in a wheel is every bit as important as the next. If any of the spokes come loose, are bent, or break, the entire wheel becomes increasingly wobbly, no longer rolls smoothly, and will eventually fall apart. Loose Cannon Imagine if an employee decided to make waves, and took a printed copy of their job description, tore it up, and stated to everyone in their department that they aren’t going to take on the responsibilities for their position — and would only do the portions they want to — and only when they feel like doing them. Wouldn’t that be a textbook example of insubordination? Yes, of course, it would.  Run a Tight Ship Leaders within the organization must foster a healthy culture where “all hands on deck” is the expectation and the norm. They must make it clear, “This X marks our destination. This is where we’re going. Everyone on board here needs to be rowing in unison to help ensure we arrive at our destination. Everyone rows together. And not rowing is not an option.”