 Four Ways to Marry Your Sales and Marketing for Data-Driven Alignment  When my husband, Justin, and I were co-founders of a martech SaaS, he was the CEO and responsible for finance, marketing and operations. I was responsible for sales, services, support and customer success. Needless to say, we figured our personal connection came with the bonus of providing seamless sales & marketing alignment. Then we grew to the point where we needed a director of sales. We hired from within. And can you guess what he said was his top priority in his first leadership meeting? Yep, you guessed it, sales and marketing alignment. Despite being married, we were not aligned. Like many SaaS companies, we were data-driven from top to bottom. Each team had a set of KPIs they were accountable to deliver. But back then, the problem was that each department was relatively siloed with KPIs myopically focused on department performance. Too little consideration was paid to broader business benefits. This was acutely true in sales and marketing. Sales focused on activity metrics — calls, appointments, demos; and performance metrics — pipeline, bookings, up-sells, cross-sells, renewals. Marketing was riveted on volume — leads, traffic, inbounds, engagement; and efficiency in terms of ratios and cost-per-lead, -opportunity, and -deal. There were no shared metrics, which meant there was little incentive for alignment. Here’s how we worked to align our teams for a sales and marketing match made in heaven. We stopped in-house finger-pointing The first place we needed alignment was around leads. A sure sign of sales & marketing dysfunction is the finger-pointing that often occurs between demand-gen marketing and sales. Heck, that sometimes degrades to the point where sales doesn’t even give marketing-generated leads (MGLs) any attention (making marketing investment a complete was of money and time). To stop playing the blame game, we completely did away with the cost-per-lead metric. Why? Because it didn’t matter to the business what we paid for a lead. All that mattered was what we paid for a customer (CAC). And yes, we could back into that with ten different funnel sub-metrics and ratios, or we could redefine the top of the funnel to focus on what we really needed. Our solution, “cost-per-assigned-lead” (CPAL) was born out of sales & marketing defining and codifying our ideal customer profile (ICP) as a basic, automated, lead profile criteria. The most important thing here is that the criteria tied back to ICP and was mutually defined by sales and marketing. It was black and white — if leads met this basic set of criteria, they were assigned to SDRs who would work them through a standard process. From there, we would then compare deeper funnel metrics on MGLs versus sales-generated leads (SGLs) to make investment decisions and balance the overall effort (% SGL vs. MGL) for optimal return. To give you an idea what CPAL criteria looked like (and how we were able to make it so black and white), here are some of those points: ICP Country Only (per list) Not an Agency $10M+ in Revenue Decision-making Role (per a predefined list) Verifiable Human (which was verified not by technology, but by a lead scoring human!) Using CPAL instead of CPL, we had faster market feedback on programs and spend that led to faster optimization and less waste. More importantly, we had an intrinsically aligned top-of-funnel data point that meant that every assigned lead was attended to equally. Sales trusted that MGLs were just as valuable as SGLs and CAC dropped more than 30% in subsequent quarters. Oh, and churn went down (LTV went up) in subsequent renewal periods because customer fit was stronger from the outset. Finding quick compromises that benefit both teams is one of the secrets to sales and marketing relationship success. A recent study by CSO Insights found that companies with “dynamic, adaptable sales and marketing processes” also report 10% more sales people on-quota. It’s not a coincidence that better communication and adaptability leads to teams that can quickly identify customers with the most potential. We combined sales and marketing operations into a single role Many SaaS companies have a marketing ops role and/or a sales ops role. We had both a sales ops person responsible for data and salestech like Salesforce, DiscoverOrg, InsideView, SalesLoft, and so on. And then we had a marketing ops person who owned data and martech tools like Pardot, ion, Sigstr, Oktopost, and so on. All in all, we had more than 50 tools in our siloed stacks. No wonder there were some disconnects. In an intentional effort to reduce friction, improve efficiency, and unify data strategy, we created a unified sales and marketing Ops role. This person owned and managed the entire sales & marketing stack from lead origination to attribution to sales admin and analytics. He literally attended both the sales and the marketing standup every day. As a result, he listened, spoke, and cross-pollinated naturally. Aside from improving communication and transparency, this shared role reduced redundancies, smoothed sharp edges, and increased lead velocity. This improved customer experience and shortened sales cycles. We married data strategy We were uniquely positioned to collect and leverage data in its funnel with our own SaaS. Our tool was purpose-built to engage prospects in a digital dialogue that resulted in explicitly declared data. But in order for that data to be valuable, it had to be part of a unified sales & marketing data strategy. Like any successful marriage, communication was key; marketing needed to understand what sales wanted to know about prospects and then design interactive content tools to get that data. Of course, this all needed to tie back to our ideal customer profile (ICP) to lay solid groundwork for retention and expansion. According to Marketing Profs, sharing information to better align sales and marketing is one of the best ways to reduce customer churn. A recent study shows that organizations with well-integrated sales and marketing functions can boost retention rates 36% higher than those of their more discordant competitors. We were always uniquely suited to up-level from typical, marketing automation inferred data to declared data. Sales defined what they wanted to know, marketing got those answers from interactive tools that asked the right questions. The result was higher fidelity data used to more reliably surface buy-ready leads faster. That translates to less wasted sales team time, and faster lead velocity. And, again, that bubbles up to lower CAC (more efficiency) and higher LTV (better quality customers). We started sharing KPIS Here’s where it all comes full circle. Those lists of disparate, disconnected marketing vs. sales KPIs needed some connections to make them joint KPIs that the business could collectively work toward. For example, where sales tracked pipe created and marketing counted inbounds, we switched to looking at inbound pipe (a combined reflection of both teams). Shared Sales & Marketing Aligned KPI Examples Inbound Pipe Marketing Generated Pipe Normalized Closed-Lost Reasons (closed lost reasons against our established benchmarks) Lead Velocity CAC, LTV, and Magic Number Supporting the case for a healthier sales and marketing marriage By now you can see that our approach to aligning sales & marketing ran deep — operations, technology, data strategy, metrics, and even reorganization. Of course, the extent to which you can marry the functions and incentives depends on your organization, stage, and appetite for disruption. But what we know for sure is that the results are worth the effort. Predictable, capital-efficient growth is the holy grail of SaaS success. And CAC, LTV, and Magic Number distill that performance into metrics the institutional world instantly understands and values.