 A new era for sales and marketing — Chris Marr joins forces with Marcus Sheridan at IMPACT  To say it’s been a crazy few weeks is a vast understatement. Less than two weeks ago Cara and I were relaxing in the spa, celebrating my 38th birthday, when she told me the tough news that we were not going to be able to save CMA. In that moment, we made the decision to close our membership organisation — there were no real signs of growth, and it was at severe risk of becoming a financial liability. On Friday 4th October we said goodbye to our members and closed our membership forever. This was after dedicating all of 2019 to giving CMA one last try. We set new targets, we employed a full-time role (Nic), specifically for growth activities and marketing. Cara’s need to make this work for us meant she came into CMA in a professional capacity and was appointed FD, bringing with her the skills and knowledge to run and execute profit-making contracts, breakeven events and financial management from Ashton McGill. We put all our savings into CMA, made some hard choices, dropped our annual live event, and focussed on membership growth and customer service. We were 100% invested in our teaching and what we had to give in terms of championing our belief in ethical marketing. With Nic working on the membership, Cara focusing on the financials, with a lot of historical debt to manage, and me developing the consultancy side of the business, it was almost doable. But it didn’t work — we ran out of time, money and runway. On Friday 27th September, we met with our accountant, Alasdair McGill. He knew the extent of our troubles, and although we were prepared to face liquidation and the personal liabilities secured against us, Alasdair helped us to make a better decision. Regardless, we all knew that both myself and Nic no longer had a job. Telling Nic that she was being made redundant absolutely broke Cara and I. We love Nic and all that’s she’s achieved — we are honoured to have her in our lives. When we addressed our members on 3rd October, the volume of Nic’s contribution to CMA was crystal clear. Nic spoke with such vulnerability and certainty and without trepidation — commending her friends for all they have done in helping her grow and how she has been inspired by watching their journeys. As I reflect on how Nic spoke so eloquently, I realise what it truly means to be a mentor — Nic had become better than me at communicating with our members. And even though we’ve closed the door before we were done, I know that Nic above all is ready for her next stage — as am I. If you feel safe in the area you’re working in, you’re not working in the right area. Always go a little further into the water than you feel you’re capable of being in. Go a little bit out of your depth. And when you don’t feel that your feet are quite touching the bottom, you’re just about in the right place to do something exciting. — David Bowie It seems almost like a divine intervention to be able to tell you that I am not alone in my next steps. With the news of CMA, I confided in my own Mentor and true friend, Marcus Sheridan. Marcus is the most influential person in my life. My entire business philosophy is based on his They Ask, You Answer principles. I have taught 100’s of businesses and watched their successes thrive through TAYA and Big 5. Everything CMA is or was started with that friendship and respect. Late on Friday evening whilst everyone else in our home was fast asleep, I was reflecting on closing CMA and buzzing with ideas and anticipation for the future…And in the moment of my own tiptoed depths of water, I sent Marcus a Facebook message to let him know that we were closing CMA, and this is what he had to say: “It’s so odd you bring this up. I was literally thinking to myself last night (before I read your message) “I think it might be time for Chris to move on from CMA.” Really, I’m not kidding. I’ve been feeling for a while that it’s holding you back from your calling, and where you’re supposed to go next. There is only so much focus and energy one person has, and I’ve felt for a while that yours has gotten to the point where it needs to go beyond where you’ve been so as to see where you’re supposed to go next. All this to say, I’m really proud of you for making this decision. It’s good. You did something AMAZING for these people… Would you ever consider being a part of IMPACT? We have something very special happening within the company. I’m serious.” We immediately jumped on to a video call and for the next hour, Marcus told me exactly what he was looking for and what life at IMPACT — which is literally the premier “They Ask, You Answer” implementation agency in the world — would look like for me. My brain was already on overdrive, and after my call with Marcus, there was no chance of me getting to bed. I couldn’t wait, so I woke Cara up at 3:30 am to tell her what had just happened. She thought she was dreaming. Fast forward a week or so, and I’m thrilled to let you know that I’ll be joining Marcus Sheridan, Bob Ruffolo, Chris Duprey and the rest of dynamic team at IMPACT as the lead TAYA Consultant. I’ll be working from my office in Scotland, and I officially start the role on 14th October 2019. Since 2014 I’ve been working with companies of all shapes and sizes to create tangible ROI from Marcus’s ‘They Ask, You Answer’ philosophy. I’m now taking all of my experience to IMPACT, where I’ll be working with the team to create successful TAYA case studies with their clients — something you’ll be hearing much more about I’m sure as we move forward. The secret of change is to focus all your energy not on fighting the old, but on building the new.” — Socrates, Way of the Peaceful Warrior After doing my own thing for close to 10 years, the prospect of employed work was going to be a difficult pill to swallow, and I knew the transition would be difficult to make. However, this incredible opportunity at IMPACT has changed everything for me and I simply couldn’t imagine working for anyone else. Working in the role at IMPACT means I get to do what I love, what I’m good at, and I’m going to be challenged at a different level than ever before. It’s crazy unpacking all of this. Looking back over the last 10 days or so you’d think we planned it to be this way, but we didn’t. Just when I thought everything was falling apart, and I was making decisions I hoped I’d never have to make, those same decisions opened up opportunities that I never knew were available to me. I’ve been working with Marcus for more than 5 years, and now that we’re working with each other closer than ever before, it feels like we’re just about to get started on doing our best work yet. DFTBA! Chris.